Improve Error Handling Documentation (#950)
ocaml/v3.ocaml.org: data/tutorials/lg_08_error_handling.md

# Error Handling

## Error as Special Values

Don't do that.

Some languages, most emblematically C, treats certain values as errors. For
instance, when receiving data through a network connection, a function expected
to return the number of received bytes might return a negative number meaning:
“timed out waiting”. Another example would be returning the empty string when
extracting a substring of negative length. Great software was written using this
style, but is is not the proper way to deal with errors in OCaml.

OCaml has three major ways to deal with errors:
1. Exceptions
1. `Option` values
1. `Result` values

> Use them. Do not encode errors inside data. Exceptions provide a mean to deal

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Use them. Do not encode errors inside data. 

Exceptions provide a mean to deal
```
I suggest a paragraph break here to separate the commands and the explanation.

Exceptions belong to the type `exn` which is an [extensible sum type](/releases/latest/manual/extensiblevariants.html).

```ocaml
# exception Foo of string;;
exception Foo of string

# let i_will_fail () =
  raise (Foo "Oh no!");;

# i_will_fail ();;
Exception: Foo "Oh no!".
```

Here, we add a variant `Foo` to the type `exn`, and create a function that will
raise this exception. Now, how do we handle exceptions? The construct is `try
... with ...`:

```ocaml
# try i_will_fail () with Foo _ -> ();;
- : unit = ()
```

### Predefined Exceptions

The standard library predefines several exceptions, see
[`Stdlib`](/releases/latest/api/Stdlib.html). Here are a few examples:

```ocaml
# 1 / 0;;
Exception: Division_by_zero.
# List.find (fun x -> x mod 2 = 0) [1; 3; 5];;
Exception: Not_found.
# String.sub "Hello world!" 3 (-2);;
Exception: Invalid_argument "String.sub / Bytes.sub".
# let rec loop x = x :: loop x
val loop : 'a -> 'a list = <fun>
# loop 42;;
Stack overflow during evaluation (looping recursion?).
```

Although the last one doesn't look as an exception, it actually is.
```ocaml
# try loop 42 with Stack_overflow -> [];;
- : int list = []
```

> Among them the predefined exceptions of the standard library, the following ones

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Among them, the predefined exceptions of the standard library. The following ones
```

are intended to be raised by user written functions:
```ocaml
exception Exit
exception Not_found
exception Invalid_argument of string
exception Failure of string
```

> * `Exit` terminates your program with a success status, which is 0 in Unices (they do error values)

Author: In the first section, I describe encoding errors as special values, as done in C. Mainly to state explicitly it shouldn't be done in OCAml. The text between the parenthesis is not a strict requirement for this tutorial, however, I'm tempted to believe it has some relevance. But I'm open to discussion. I agree the text needs to be clarified.

* `Not_found` should be raised when searching failed because there isn't anything satisfactory to be found
* `Invalid_argument` should be raised when a parameter can't be accepted
* `Failure` should be raised when a result can't be produced

Functions are provided to raise `Invalid_argument` and `Failure` using a string parameter:
```ocaml
val invalid_arg : string -> 'a
(** @raise Invalid_argument *)
val failwith : string -> 'a
(** @raise Failure *)
```

When implementing a software component which exposes functions raising
exceptions, a design decision must be made:
* Use the prexisting exceptions
* Raise custom exceptions

Both can make sense, there isn't a general rule. If the exceptions of the

> standard library are used, they must be raised under the conditions they are

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Both can make sense, and there isn't a general rule. If the standard library exceptions
are used, they must be raised under the conditions they are
```

# Error Handling

## Error as Special Values

Don't do that.

Some languages, most emblematically C, treats certain values as errors. For
instance, when receiving data through a network connection, a function expected
to return the number of received bytes might return a negative number meaning:
“timed out waiting”. Another example would be returning the empty string when
extracting a substring of negative length. Great software was written using this
style, but is is not the proper way to deal with errors in OCaml.

OCaml has three major ways to deal with errors:
1. Exceptions
1. `Option` values
1. `Result` values

Use them. Do not encode errors inside data. 

Exceptions provide a mean to deal
with errors at the control flow level while `Option` and `Result` provide a mean
to turn errors into dedicated data.

The rest of this document presents and compares approaches towards error
handling.

## Exceptions

Historically, the first way of handling errors in OCaml is exceptions. The
standard library relies heavily upon them.

The biggest issue with exceptions is that they do not appear in types. One has
to read the documentation to see that, indeed, `List.find` or `String.sub` are

> not total functions, and that they might fail by raising an exception.

Reviewer 2: Total functions? Could benefit from unwrapping.

Author: Can you explain a little bit? I don't get what you mean

Reviewer 2: Sure thing!

Since the document is intended for newcomers, those might include people unfamiliar with functional programming terminology. I would propose either a quick sidenote or a link to a definition, preferably on our site instead of on [some other language's docs](https://wiki.haskell.org/Partial_functions).

Author: The document on [functional programming](https://ocaml.org/docs/functional-programming) needs to be updated. I was planning to add that kind of text there. I'll link to it

Reviewer 2: Sounds like the right place.

However, exceptions have the great merit of being compiled into efficient
machine code. When implementing trial and error approaches likely to back-track
often, exceptions can be used to acheive good performance.

Exceptions belong to the type `exn` which is an [extensible sum
type](/releases/latest/manual/extensiblevariants.html).

```ocaml
# exception Foo of string;;
exception Foo of string

# let i_will_fail () =
  raise (Foo "Oh no!");;

> # i_will_fail ();;

Reviewer: The output I get here is `val i_will_fail : unit -> 'a = <fun>`
Without the Exception on li 61

Author: Thanks @christinerose; a line was missing.

Exception: Foo "Oh no!".
```

Here, we add a variant `Foo` to the type `exn`, and create a function that will
raise this exception. Now, how do we handle exceptions? The construct is `try
... with ...`:

```ocaml
# try i_will_fail () with Foo _ -> ();;
- : unit = ()
```

### Predefined Exceptions

The standard library predefines several exceptions, see
[`Stdlib`](/releases/latest/api/Stdlib.html). Here are a few examples:

```ocaml
# 1 / 0;;
Exception: Division_by_zero.
# List.find (fun x -> x mod 2 = 0) [1; 3; 5];;
Exception: Not_found.
# String.sub "Hello world!" 3 (-2);;
Exception: Invalid_argument "String.sub / Bytes.sub".

> # let rec loop x = x :: loop x

Reviewer: ```suggestion
# let rec loop x = x :: loop x;;
```

val loop : 'a -> 'a list = <fun>
# loop 42;;
Stack overflow during evaluation (looping recursion?).
```

Although the last one doesn't look as an exception, it actually is.
```ocaml
# try loop 42 with Stack_overflow -> [];;
- : int list = []
```

Among them, the predefined exceptions of the standard library. The following ones
are intended to be raised by user-written functions:
```ocaml
exception Exit
exception Not_found
exception Invalid_argument of string
exception Failure of string
```

* `Exit` terminates your program with a success status, which is 0 in Unices
  (where success is 0 and any other value is an error, that is, errors are
  handled as special values, like mentioned in the first section)
* `Not_found` should be raised when searching failed because there isn't
  anything satisfactory to be found
* `Invalid_argument` should be raised when a parameter can't be accepted
* `Failure` should be raised when a result can't be produced

Functions are provided to raise `Invalid_argument` and `Failure` using a string
parameter:
```ocaml
val invalid_arg : string -> 'a
(** @raise Invalid_argument *)
val failwith : string -> 'a
(** @raise Failure *)

> ```

Reviewer: Is this code meant to be run or perhaps run in conjunction with something else?

Author: This one is just for reading

# Error Handling

> In OCaml, errors can be handled in several ways. This document presents most of the available means. However, handling errors using the effect handlers introduced in OCaml 5 isn't addressed yet.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In OCaml, errors can be handled in several ways. This document presents most of the available means. However, handling errors using the effect handlers introduced in OCaml 5 hasn't been addressed yet.
```

1. Exceptions
1. `Option` values
1. `Result` values

Use them. Do not encode errors inside data.

Exceptions provide a mean to deal with errors at the control flow level while
`Option` and `Result` provide means to turn errors into dedicated data.

The rest of this document presents and compares approaches towards error
handling.

## Exceptions

Historically, the first way of handling errors in OCaml is exceptions. The
standard library relies heavily upon them.

The biggest issue with exceptions is that they do not appear in types. One has
to read the documentation to see that, indeed, `List.find` or `String.sub` are functions that they might fail by raising an exception.

However, exceptions have the great merit of being compiled into efficient
machine code. When implementing trial and error approaches likely to back-track
often, exceptions can be used to achieve good performance.

Exceptions belong to the type `exn` which is an [extensible sum
type](/manual/extensiblevariants.html).

```ocaml
# exception Foo of string;;
exception Foo of string

# let i_will_fail () = raise (Foo "Oh no!");;
val i_will_fail : unit -> 'a = <fun>

# i_will_fail ();;
Exception: Foo "Oh no!".
```

> Here, we add a variant `Foo` to the type `exn`, and create a function that will

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Here, we add a variant `Foo` to the type `exn` and create a function that will
```

raise this exception. Now, how do we handle exceptions? The construct is `try
... with ...`:

```ocaml
# try i_will_fail () with Foo _ -> ();;
- : unit = ()
```

### Predefined Exceptions

The standard library predefines several exceptions, see
[`Stdlib`](/releases/latest/api/Stdlib.html). Here are a few examples:

```ocaml
# 1 / 0;;
Exception: Division_by_zero.
# List.find (fun x -> x mod 2 = 0) [1; 3; 5];;
Exception: Not_found.
# String.sub "Hello world!" 3 (-2);;
Exception: Invalid_argument "String.sub / Bytes.sub".
# let rec loop x = x :: loop x;;
val loop : 'a -> 'a list = <fun>
# loop 42;;
Stack overflow during evaluation (looping recursion?).
```

Although the last one doesn't look as an exception, it actually is.
```ocaml
# try loop 42 with Stack_overflow -> [];;
- : int list = []
```

Among the predefined exceptions of the standard library, the following ones
are intended to be raised by user-written functions:
```ocaml
exception Exit
exception Not_found
exception Invalid_argument of string
exception Failure of string
```

* `Exit` terminates your program with a success status, which is 0 in Unices

>   (where success is 0 and any other value is an error, that is, errors are

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* `Exit` terminates your program with a success status, which is 0 in Unices
  (where success is 0 and any other value is an error; that is, errors are
```

  handled as special values, like mentioned in the first section)
* `Not_found` should be raised when searching failed because there isn't
  anything satisfactory to be found
* `Invalid_argument` should be raised when a parameter can't be accepted
* `Failure` should be raised when a result can't be produced

Functions are provided by the standard library to raise `Invalid_argument` and
`Failure` using a string parameter:
```ocaml
val invalid_arg : string -> 'a
(** @raise Invalid_argument *)
val failwith : string -> 'a
(** @raise Failure *)
```

When implementing a software component which exposes functions raising
exceptions, a design decision must be made:
* Use the prexisting exceptions
* Raise custom exceptions

Both can make sense, and there isn't a general rule. If the standard library exceptions
are used, they must be raised under the conditions they are
intended to, otherwise handlers will have trouble processing them. Using custom
exceptions will force client code to include dedicated catch conditions. This

> can be desirable for errors that must be handled at the client level.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
are used, they must be raised under their intended conditions, 
otherwise handlers will have trouble processing them. Using custom
exceptions will force client code to include dedicated catch conditions. This
can be desirable for errors that must be handled at the client level.
```

<!-- $MDX skip -->
```ocaml
val foo : a -> b
(** [foo] does this and that, here is how it works, etc.
    @raise Invalid_argument if [a] doesn't satisfy ...
    @raise Sys_error if filesystem is not happy
*)
```

> ### Stack traces

Reviewer: ```suggestion
### Stack Traces
```

<!-- $MDX skip -->
```ocaml
val foo : a -> b
(** [foo] does this and that, here is how it works, etc.
    @raise Invalid_argument if [a] doesn't satisfy ...
    @raise Sys_error if filesystem is not happy

> *)

Reviewer: Same question... is this meant to run or is it just info?

Author: That's just for reading. The <!-- $MDX skip --> means it should not go in the top level

```

### Stack Traces

To get a stack trace when an unhandled exception makes your program crash, you
need to compile the program in "debug" mode (with `-g` when calling `ocamlc`, or
`-tag 'debug'` when calling `ocamlbuild`). Then:

```
OCAMLRUNPARAM=b ./myprogram [args]
```

And you will get a stack trace. Alternatively, you can call, from within the
program,

> ```ocaml

Reviewer: Is the code li 160 - 191 examples of code the user will write themselves, or is it something the reader should be able to test when going through this doc?

Author: Again, that's for reading only

<!-- $MDX skip -->
```ocaml
val foo : a -> b
(** [foo] does this and that, here is how it works, etc.
    @raise Invalid_argument if [a] doesn't satisfy ...
    @raise Sys_error if filesystem is not happy
*)
```

### Stack Traces

To get a stack trace when an unhandled exception makes your program crash, you
need to compile the program in debug mode (with `-g` when calling `ocamlc`, or
`-tag 'debug'` when calling `ocamlbuild`). Then:

```shell
OCAMLRUNPARAM=b ./myprogram [args]
```

And you will get a stack trace. Alternatively, you can call, from within the
program,

```ocaml
let () = Printexc.record_backtrace true
```

### Printing

> To print an exception, the module `Printexc` comes in handy. For instance, it
> allows the definition of a function such as `notify_user : (unit -> 'a) -> 'a`
> that calls a function and, if it fails, prints the exception on `stderr`. If
> stack traces are enabled, this function will also display it.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
To print an exception, the module `Printexc` comes in handy. For instance, it
allows the definition of a function, such as `notify_user : (unit -> 'a) -> 'a`
to call a function and, if it fails, prints the exception on `stderr`. If
stack traces are enabled, this function will also display it.
```

OCAMLRUNPARAM=b ./myprogram [args]
```

> And you will get a stack trace. Alternatively, you can call, from within the program,

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This will produce a stack trace. Alternatively, you can call, from within the program,
```
(if my suggestion is correct!)

`Some <printed exception>`, and return `None` otherwise (let the other printers
do the job!).

## Runtime Crashes

Although OCaml is a very safe language, it is possible to trigger unrecoverable
errors at runtime.

> ### Exceptions not Raised

Reviewer: ```suggestion
### Exceptions Not Raised
```

> Under panic circumstances, the native code compiler does a best-effort at

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Under panic circumstances, the native code compiler gives its best effort for
```

```

### Language Bugs

When a crash isn't coming from:
* A limitation of the native code compiler
* `Obj.magic`

It may be a language bug. It happens. Here is what to do when this is suspected:

1. Make sure the crash affects both compilers: bytecode and native
1. Write a self-contained and minimal proof-of-concept code which does nothing but triggering the crash
1. File an issue in the [OCaml Bug Tracker in GitHub](https://github.com/ocaml/ocaml/issues)

Here is an example of such a bug: https://github.com/ocaml/ocaml/issues/7241

### Safe vs. Unsafe Functions

Uncaught exceptions raise runtime crashes. Therefore, there is a tendency to use
the following terminology:
* Function raising exceptions: Unsafe
* Function handling errors in data: Safe

The main means to write such kind of safe error handling functions is to use
either `Option` (next section) or `Result` (following section).

## Using the `Option` Type for Errors

The `Option` module provides the first alternative to exceptions. The `'a
option` datatype allows to express either the availability of data for instance
`Some 42` or the absence of data using `None`, which can represent an error.

> Using `Option` it is possible to write function that return `None` instead of

Reviewer: ```suggestion
When using `Option`, it is possible to write function that return `None` instead of
```

throwing an exception.
```ocaml
let div_opt m n =
  try Some (m / n) with
    Division_by_zero -> None

let find_opt p l =
  try Some (List.find p l) with
    Not_found -> None
```
We can try those functions:

```ocaml
# 1 / 0;;
Exception: Division_by_zero.
# div_opt 42 2;;
- : int option = Some 24
# div_opt 42 0;;
- : int option = None
# List.find (fun x -> x mod 2 = 0) [1; 3; 5];;
Exception: Not_found.
# find_opt (fun x -> x mod 2 = 0) [1; 3; 4; 5];;
- : int option = Some 4
# find_opt (fun x -> x mod 2 = 0) [1; 3; 5];;
- : int option = None
```

This can even be turned into a higher-order generic function:
```ocaml
# let try_opt f x = try Some (f x) with _ -> None;;
val try_opt : ('a -> 'b) -> 'a -> 'b option = <fun>
```

It tends to be considered good practice nowadays when a function can fail in
cases that are not bugs (i.e., not `assert false`, but network failures, keys
not present, etc.) to return a more explicit type such as `'a option` or `('a,
'b) result` (see next section).

### Naming Conventions

There are two naming conventions to have two versions of the same partial

> function, one raising exception, the other returning an option. In the above

Reviewer: ```suggestion
function: one raising exception, the other returning an option. In the above
```

examples, the convention of the standard library is used add an `_opt` suffix to

> name of the version of the function which returns an option instead of raising

Reviewer: ```suggestion
name of the version of the function that returns an option instead of raising
```

exceptions.
```ocaml
val find: ('a -> bool) -> 'a list -> 'a
(** @raise Not_found *)
val find_opt: ('a -> bool) -> 'a list -> 'a option
```
This is extracted from the `List` module of the standard library.

> However, some project tend to avoid or reduce the usage of exceptions. In such a

Reviewer: ```suggestion
However, some projects tend to avoid or reduce the usage of exceptions. In such a
```

context, reversing the convention is a relatively common idiom. It is the

> version of the function which raises exceptions that is suffixed with `_exn`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
version of the function that raises exceptions that is suffixed with `_exn`.
```

empty.

As a remark, observe that `value` can be implemented using `fold`:
```ocaml
# let value ~default = Option.fold ~none:default ~some:Fun.id;;
val value : default:'a -> 'a option -> 'a = <fun>
# Option.value ~default:() None = value ~default:() None;;
- : bool = true
# Option.value ~default:() (Some ()) = value ~default:() (Some ());;
- : bool = true
```

It is also possible to perform pattern matching on option values:
```ocaml
match opt with
| None -> ...    (* Something *)
| Some x -> ...  (* Something else *)
```
However, sequencing such expressions leads to deep nesting which is often considered bad:

> if you need more than 3 levels of indentation, you're screwed anyway, and should fix your program.

[Linux Kernel Style Guide](https://www.kernel.org/doc/Documentation/process/coding-style.rst)

The recomended way to avoid that is to refrain from or delay attempting to
access the content of an option value.

### Using on `Option.map` and `Option.bind`

Let's start with an example. Let's imagine one needs to write a function
returning the [hostname](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Hostname) part of an
email address. For instance, given the email

> "gaston.lagaffe@courrier.dupuis.be", it would return "courrier".

Reviewer: ```suggestion
"gaston.lagaffe@courrier.dupuis.be," it would return "courrier."
```

> Here is a questionable but straitforward implementation, using exceptions:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Here is a questionable but straightforward implementation using exceptions:
```

```ocaml
let host email =
  let fqdn_pos = String.index email '@' + 1 in
  let fqdn_len = String.length email - fqdn_pos in
  let fqdn = String.sub email fqdn_pos fqdn_len in
  try
    let host_len = String.index fqdn '.' in
    String.sub fqdn 0 host_len
  with Not_found ->
    if fqdn <> "" then fqdn else raise Not_found
```
This may fail by raising `Not_found` if the first the call to `String.index`
does, which make sense since if there is no `@` character in the input string,

> it's not an email address. However, if the second call to `String.index` fails,

Reviewer: ```suggestion
signifying that it's not an email address. However, if the second call to `String.index` fails,
```

meaning no dot character was found, we may return the whole fully qualified
domain name (FQDN) as a fallback, but only if it isn't the empty string.

Note that `String.sub` may throw `Invalid_argument`. Fortunately, this can't
happen. In the worst case, the `@` character is the last one, then `fqdn_pos` is

> off range by one but `fqdn_len` is null and that combination of parameters

Reviewer: ```suggestion
off range by one but `fqdn_len` is null, and that combination of parameters
```

doesn't count as an invalid substring.

> Here the equivalent function, using the same logic but `Option` instead of

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Below is the equivalent function using the same logic, but using `Option` instead of
```

exceptions:
```ocaml
let host_opt email =
  match String.index_opt email '@' with
  | Some at_pos -> begin
      let fqdn_pos = at_pos + 1 in
      let fqdn_len = String.length email - fqdn_pos in
      let fqdn = String.sub email fqdn_pos fqdn_len in
      match String.index_opt fqdn '.' with
      | Some host_len -> Some (String.sub fqdn 0 host_len)
      | None -> if fqdn <> "" then Some fqdn else None
    end
  | None -> None
```

Although it qualifies as safe, its legibility isn't improved. Some may even
claim it is worse.

Before showing how to improve this code, we need to explain how `Option.map` and
`Option.bind` work.
```ocaml
val Option.map : ('a -> 'b) -> 'a option -> 'b option
val Option.bind : 'a option -> ('a -> 'b option) -> 'b option
```

`Option.map` applies a function `f` to an option parameter, if it isn't `None`
```ocaml
let map f = function
| Some x -> Some (f x)
| None -> None
```

If `f` can be applied to something, its result is rewrapped into a fresh option.
If there isn't anything to supply to `f`, `None` is forwarded.

If we don't take arguments order into account, `Option.bind` is almost exacly

> the same, except we assume `f` returns an option, therefore there is no need to

Reviewer: ```suggestion
the same, except we assume `f` returns an option. Therefore, there is no need to
```

> rewrapped its result, it's already an option value:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
rewrapped its result; it's already an option value:
```

```ocaml
let bind opt f = match opt with
| Some x -> f x
| None -> None
```

`bind` having flipped parameter with respect to `map` allows to use it as custom
let binder:
```ocaml
# let ( let* ) = Option.bind;;
val ( let* ) : 'a option -> ('a -> 'b option) -> 'b option = <fun>
```

Using these mechanisms, here a possible way to rewrite `host_opt`:
```ocaml
# let host_opt email =
  let* fqdn_pos = Option.map (( + ) 1) (String.index_opt email '@') in
  let fqdn_len = String.length email - fqdn_pos in
  let fqdn = String.sub email fqdn_pos fqdn_len in
  String.index_opt fqdn '.'
  |> Option.map (fun host_len -> String.sub fqdn 0 host_len)
  |> function None when fqdn <> "" -> Some fqdn | opt -> opt;;
val host_opt : string -> string option = <fun>
```

This version was picked to illustrate how to use and combine operations on

> options allowing to acheive some balance between understandability and

Reviewer: ```suggestion
options allowing users to achieve some balance between understandability and
```

robustness. A couple of observations:
* As in the original `host` function (with exceptions):

>    - The calls to `String` functions (`index_opt`, `length` and `sub`) are the

Reviewer: ```suggestion
   - The calls to `String` functions (`index_opt`, `length`, and `sub`) are the
```

  same and in the same order

>    - The same local names are used, with the same types

Reviewer: ```suggestion
   - The same local names are used with the same types
```

> * There isn't any indentation or pattern-matching left

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* There isn't any remaining indentation or pattern-matching
```

* Line 1:
  - right-hand side of `=` : `Option.map` allows adding 1 to the result of `String.index_opt`, if it didn't failed
  - left-hand side of `=` : the `let*` syntax turns all the rest of the
  code (from line 2 to the end) into the body of an anonymous function which
  takes `fqdn_pos` as parameter, and the function `( let* )` is called with the
  right-hand side of `=` (as first parameter) and that anonymous function (as
  second parameter).
* Lines 2 and 3: same as in the original
* Line 4: `try` or `match` is removed
* Line 5: `String.sub` is applied, if the previous step didn't failed, otherwise the error is forwarded
* Line 6: if nothing was found earlier, and if isn't empty, `fqdn` is returned as a fallback

When used to handle errors with catch statements, it requires some time to get
used the latter style. The key idea is avoiding or defering from directly

> looking into option values, instead pass them along using _ad-hoc_ pipes (such

Reviewer: ```suggestion
looking into option values. Instead, pass them along using _ad-hoc_ pipes (such
```

as `map` and `bind`). Erik Meijer calls that following the happy path. Visually,

> it also looks like to the “early return“ pattern often found in C.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
it also resembles the “early return“ pattern often found in C.
```

One of the limitation of the option type is it doesn't record the reason which

> prevented from having a value. `None` is silent, it doesn't say anything about

Reviewer: ```suggestion
One of the limitations of the option type is that it doesn't record the reason why it
prevented assigning a value. `None` is silent, it doesn't say anything about
```

what went wrong. For this reason, function returning option values should
document the circumstances under which it may return `None`. Such a
documentation is likely to ressemble to the one required for exceptions using
`@raise`. The `Result` type is intended to fill this gap: manage error in data,
like option values but also provide information on errors, like exceptions. It

> is the topic of the next section.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
`@raise`. The `Result` type is intended to fill this gap: manage error in data,
like option values, but also provide information on errors, like exceptions. It
is the topic of the next section.
```

## `Result` Type

The `Result` module of the standard library defines the following type:

```ocaml
type ('a, 'b) result =
  | Ok of 'a
  | Error of 'b
```

A value `Ok x` means that the computation succeeded and produced `x`, and a

> value `Error e` means that it failed and `e` represents whatever information

Reviewer: ```suggestion
A value `Ok x` means that the computation succeeded and produced `x`, a
value `Error e` means that it failed, and `e` represents whatever information
```

collected in the process. Pattern matching can be used to deal with both cases,
as with any other sum type. However using `map` and `bind` can be more
convinient, maybe even more as it was with `Option`.

Before taking a look at `Result.map`, let's think about `List.map` and

> `Option.map` under a changed perspective. Both functions behaves like the

Reviewer: ```suggestion
`Option.map` under a changed perspective. Both functions behave like the
```

```ocaml
let map f = function
| Ok x -> Ok (f x)
| Error e -> Error e
```

The `Result` module has two map functions: the one we've just seen and another
one, with the same logic, applied to `Error`:
```ocaml
let map_error f = function
| Ok x -> Ok x
| Error e -> f e
```

The same reasoning applies to `Result.bind`, except there's no `bind_error`.
Using those functions, here is an hypothetical example of code using [Anil
Madhavapeddy OCaml Yaml library](https://github.com/avsm/ocaml-yaml):
```ocaml
let file_opt = File.read_opt path in
let file_res = Option.to_result ~none:(`Msg "File not found") file_opt in begin
  let* yaml = Yaml.of_string file_res in
  let* found_opt = Yaml.Util.find key yaml in
  let* found = Option.to_result ~none:(`Msg (key ^ ", key not found")) found_opt in
  found
end |> Result.map_error (Printf.sprintf "%s, error: %s: " path)
```

Here are the types of the involved functions:
```ocaml
val File.read_opt : string -> string option
val Yaml.of_string : string -> (Yaml.value, [`Msg of string]) result
val Yaml.Util.find : string -> Yaml.value -> (Yaml.value option, [`Msg of string]) result
val Option.to_result : none:'e -> 'a option -> ('a, 'e) result
```

> - `File.read_opt` is supposed to open a file, read its contents and return it as a

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- `File.read_opt` is supposed to open a file, read its contents, and return it as a
```

> string wrapped in an option, if anything goes wrong `None` is returned.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
string wrapped in an option. If anything goes wrong `None` is returned.
```

- `Yaml.of_string` parses a string an turns into an ad-hoc OCaml type
- `Yaml.find` recursively searches a key in a Yaml tree, if found, it returns the

>   corresponding data, wrapped in an option

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- `Yaml.of_string` parses a string and turns it into an ad-hoc OCaml type.
- `Yaml.find` recursively searches a key in a Yaml tree. If found, it returns the
  corresponding data, wrapped in an option.
```

> - `Option.to_result` perform conversion of an `option` into a `result`
> - Finally, `let*` stands for `Result.bind`

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- `Option.to_result` performs conversion of an `option` into a `result`.
- Finally, `let*` stands for `Result.bind`.
```

Since functions from the `Yaml` module both returns `result` data, it is easier
to write a pipe which process that type all along. That's why `Option.to_result`
needs to be used. Stages which produce `result` must be chained using `bind`,
stages which do not must be chained using some map function, in order for the

> result to be wrapped back into a `result`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
needs to be used. Stages which produce `result` must be chained using `bind`;
stages which do not must be chained using some map function in order for the
result to be wrapped back into a `result`.
```

The map functions of the `Result` module allows processing of data or errors,
but the routines used must not fail, as `Result.map` will never turn an `Ok`
into an `Error` and `Result.map_error` will never turn an `Error` into an `Ok`.
On the other hand, functions passed to `Result.bind` are allowed to fail. As
stated before there isn't a `Result.bind_error`. One way to make sense out of
that absence is to consider its type, it would have to be:
```ocaml
val Result.bind_error : ('a, 'e) result -> ('e -> ('a, 'f) result) -> ('a, 'f) result
```
We would have:
* `Result.map_error f (Ok x) = Ok x`
* And either:
  - `Result.map_error f (Error e) = Ok y`
  - `Result.map_error f (Error e) = Error e'`

> Which means an error would be turned back into valid data, or changed into

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This means an error would be turned back into valid data or changed into
```

another error. This is almost like recovering from an error. However, when
recovery fails, it may be preferable to preserve the initial cause of failure.
That behaviour can be acheived by defining the following function:

```ocaml
# let recover f = Result.(fold ~ok:ok ~error:(fun (e : 'e) -> Option.to_result ~none:e (f e)));;
val recover : ('e -> 'a option) -> ('a, 'e) result -> ('a, 'e) result = <fun>
```

Although any kind of data can be wrapped as a `result` `Error`, it is
recommended to use that constructor to carry actual errors, for instance:

> - `exn`, in which case the result type just makes exceptions explicit.
> - `string`, where the error case is a message that indicates what failed.
> - `string Lazy.t`, a more elaborate form of error message that is only evaluated
>   if printing is required.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- `exn`, in which case the result type just makes exceptions explicit
- `string`, where the error case is a message that indicates what failed
- `string Lazy.t`, a more elaborate form of error message that is only evaluated
  if printing is required
```

> - some polymorphic variant, with one case per possible error. This is very
>   accurate (each error can be dealt with explicitly and occurs in the type) but
>   the use of polymorphic variants sometimes make the code harder to read.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- some polymorphic variant, with one case per possible error. This is very
  accurate (each error can be dealt with explicitly and occurs in the type), but
  the use of polymorphic variants sometimes make the code harder to read.
```

Note that some say the types `result` and `Either.t` are
[ismorphic](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Isomorphism). Concretely, it means
it's always possible to replace one by the other, like in a completely neutral
refactoring. Values of type `result` and `Either.t` can be translated back and
forth, and appling both translations one after the other, in any order, returns
to the starting value. Nethertheless, this doesn't mean `result` should be used
in place of `Either.t`, or vise versa. Naming things matters, as punned by Phil
Karlton famous quote:

> There are only two hard things in Computer Science: cache invalidation and
> naming things.

Properly handling errors always makes the code harder to read. Using the right

> tools, data and functions can help. Use them.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
tools, data, and functions can help. Use them.
```

## `bind` as a Binary Operator

When `Option.bind` or `Result.bind` are used, they are often aliased into a
custom binding operator, such as `let*`. However, it is also possible to use
it as binary operator, which is almost always writen `>>=`. Using `bind` this
way must be detailed because it is extremly popular in other functional
programming language, and specially in OCaml's arch-rival _Which Must Not Be
Named_.

Assuming `a` and `b` are valid OCaml expressions, the three pieces of sources
code are exactly the same:

```ocaml
bind a (fun x -> b)
```
```ocaml
let* x = a in b
```
```ocaml
a >>= fun x -> b
```

It may seem pointless. To make sense, one must look at expressions where several
calls to `bind` are chained. The following three are also equivalent:

```ocaml
bind a (fun x -> bind b (fun y -> c))
```
```ocaml
let* x = a in
let* y = b in
c
```
```ocaml
a >>= fun x -> b >>= fun y -> c
```
Variables `x` and `y` may appear in `c` in the three cases. The first form isn't
very convinent, it uses a lot of parenthesis. The second one is often the

> prefered one due to its ressemblance with regular local definitions. The third

Reviewer: ```suggestion
very convenient, it uses a lot of parenthesis. The second one is often
preferred due to its ressemblance with regular local definitions. The third
```

> one is harder to read, `>>=` associates to the right in order to avoid

Reviewer: ```suggestion
one is harder to read, as `>>=` associates to the right in order to avoid
```

parenthesis in that precise case, but it's easy to get lost. Nethertheless, it
has some appeal when named functions are used. It looks a bit like good old Unix
pipes:
```ocaml
a >>= f >>= g
```
looks better than:
```ocaml
let* x = a in
let* y = f x in
g y
```

> Writing `x >>= f` is very close to what is found in functionally tained

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Writing `x >>= f` is very close to what is found in functional
```

> programming languages which have methods and receivers such as Kotlin, Scala,

Reviewer: ```suggestion
programming languages, which have methods and receivers such as Kotlin, Scala,
```

> Go, Rust, Swift or even modern Java, where it would be looking like: `x.bind(f)`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Go, Rust, Swift, or even modern Java, where it would look like: `x.bind(f)`.
```

Here is the same code as presented at the end of the previous section, rewritten
using `Result.bind` as a binary opeator:
```ocaml
File.read_opt path
|> Option.to_result ~none:(`Msg "File not found")
>>= Yaml.of_string
>>= Yaml.Util.find key
>>= Option.to_result ~none:(`Msg (key ^ ", key not found"))
|> Result.map_error (Printf.sprintf "%s, error: %s: " path)
```

By the way, this style is called [Tacit
Programming](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Tacit_programming). Thanks to the

> associativity priorities of the >>= and |> operators, no parenthesis are needed. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
associativity priorities of the `>>=` and `|>` operators, no parenthesis are needed. 
```

> OCaml has a strict typing discipline, not a strict styling discipline, therefore

Reviewer: ```suggestion
OCaml has a strict typing discipline, not a strict styling discipline; therefore,
```

picking the right style is an author's decision. See the [OCaml Programming
Guidelines](/docs/guidelines) for more details on those matters.

## Assertions

The built-in `assert` instruction takes an expression as an argument and throws
the `Assert_failure` exception if the provided expression evaluates to `false`.
Assuming that you don't catch this exception (it's probably unwise to catch this

> exception, particularly for beginners), this results in the program stopping and
> printing out the source file and line number where the error occurred. An

Reviewer: ```suggestion
exception, particularly for beginners), this causes the program to stop and
print the source file and line number where the error occurred. An
```

example:

```ocaml
# assert (Sys.os_type = "Win32");;
Exception: Assert_failure ("//toplevel//", 1, 0).
```

Running this on Win32, of course, won't throw an error.

Writing `assert false` would just stop your program. This idiom is sometimes
used to indicate [dead code](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Dead_code), parts of
the program that must be writen (often for type-checking or pattern matching
completeness) but are unreachable at run time.

> Asserts should be undetstood as executable comments. There aren't supposed to

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Asserts should be understood as executable comments. They aren't supposed to
```

> fail, unless during debugging or truely extraordinary circumstances absolutely
> preventing the execution from making any kind of progress.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
fail, unless during debugging or truly extraordinary circumstances that absolutely
prevent the execution from making any kind of progress.
```

    )
```

Each printer should take care of the exceptions it knows about, returning `Some
<printed exception>`, and return `None` otherwise (let the other printers do the
job!).

## Runtime Crashes

Although OCaml is a very safe language, it is possible to trigger unrecoverable
errors at runtime.

### Exceptions Not Raised

Under panic circumstances, the native code compiler gives its best effort for
raising meaningful exceptions. However, some error conditions may remain
undetected, which will result in a segmentation fault. This is the specially the
case for stack overflows, which aren't always detected.

> But catching stack overflows is tricky, both in Unix-like systems and under
> Windows, so the current implementation in OCaml is a best effort that is
> occasionally buggy.

[Xavier Leroy, October
2021](https://discuss.ocaml.org/t/stack-overflow-reported-as-segfault/8646/8)

### Bypassing Type-Safety

OCaml provides a mean to bypass its own type safety. Don't use it. Here is how

> to shoot in one's own feet:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
OCaml provides means to bypass its type safety. Don't use it. Here is how
to shoot oneself in the foot:
```

```shell
> echo "(Obj.magic () : int array).(0)" > foo.ml
> ocamlopt foo.ml
> ./a.out

> Segmentation fault (core dumped)

Reviewer: I get a Syntax error here if I put ``;;`` at the end, and it just doesn't give an output without it. 
Also, the command prompt is denoted as a `>` here whereas earlier in the document it's `#`
Should they be the same?

Author: That one is tricky! :-)

It is supposed to be executed in a Unix Shell, not in the top level. Additionally, it is expected to fail!

Reviewer: Will that be clear to the reader about the Unix shell?

Author: Yes, it trust they should be.

1. Write a self-contained and minimal proof-of-concept code which does nothing
   but triggering the crash
1. File an issue in the [OCaml Bug Tracker in
   GitHub](https://github.com/ocaml/ocaml/issues)

Here is an example of such a bug: https://github.com/ocaml/ocaml/issues/7241

### Safe vs. Unsafe Functions

Uncaught exceptions raise runtime crashes. Therefore, there is a tendency to use
the following terminology:
* Function raising exceptions: Unsafe
* Function handling errors in data: Safe

The main means to write such kind of safe error handling functions is to use
either `Option` (next section) or `Result` (following section).

## Using the `Option` Type for Errors

The `Option` module provides the first alternative to exceptions. The `'a
option` datatype allows to express either the availability of data for instance
`Some 42` or the absence of data using `None`, which can represent an error.

Using `Option` it is possible to write functions that return `None` instead of
throwing an exception.
```ocaml
let div_opt m n =
  try Some (m / n) with
    Division_by_zero -> None

let find_opt p l =
  try Some (List.find p l) with

>     Not_found -> None

Reviewer: Should there be an `;;` at the end here?
If I put it there, I get this response: 
```
val div_opt : int -> int -> int option = <fun>
val find_opt : ('a -> bool) -> 'a list -> 'a option = <fun>
```

Author: Yes, you are right, it was missing

```
We can try those functions:

```ocaml
# 1 / 0;;
Exception: Division_by_zero.
# div_opt 42 2;;

> - : int option = Some 24

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- : int option = Some 21
```

Author: Excellent! Thanks a lot.

# div_opt 42 0;;
- : int option = None
# List.find (fun x -> x mod 2 = 0) [1; 3; 5];;
Exception: Not_found.
# find_opt (fun x -> x mod 2 = 0) [1; 3; 4; 5];;
- : int option = Some 4
# find_opt (fun x -> x mod 2 = 0) [1; 3; 5];;
- : int option = None
```

This can even be turned into a higher-order generic function:
```ocaml
# let try_opt f x = try Some (f x) with _ -> None;;
val try_opt : ('a -> 'b) -> 'a -> 'b option = <fun>
```

It tends to be considered good practice nowadays when a function can fail in
cases that are not bugs (i.e., not `assert false`, but network failures, keys
not present, etc.) to return a more explicit type such as `'a option` or `('a,
'b) result` (see next section).

### Naming Conventions

There are two naming conventions to have two versions of the same partial
function: one raising exception, the other returning an option. In the above
examples, the convention of the standard library is to add an `_opt` suffix to
name of the version of the function that returns an option instead of raising
exceptions.
```ocaml
val find: ('a -> bool) -> 'a list -> 'a
(** @raise Not_found *)

> val find_opt: ('a -> bool) -> 'a list -> 'a option

Reviewer: Is this code meant to be examples of what they can write, or should it be something they can test right now?

If I add the `;;` to the end, I get this response:
```
Error: Value declarations are only allowed in signatures
```

Author: When the code begins with the "val" keyword it always for reading only.

```
This is extracted from the `List` module of the standard library.

However, some projects tend to avoid or reduce the usage of exceptions. In such
a context, reversing the convention is a relatively common idiom. It is the
version of the function that raises exceptions that is suffixed with `_exn`.
Using the same functions, that would be the specification
```ocaml
val find_exn: ('a -> bool) -> 'a list -> 'a
(** @raise Not_found *)

> val find: ('a -> bool) -> 'a list -> 'a option

Reviewer: Same question as above.

Author: Same answer :-)

```
### Composing Functions Returning Options

The function `div_opt` can't raise exceptions. However, since it doesn't return
a result of type `int`, it can't be used in place of an `int`. The same way
OCaml doesn't
[promote](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Type_conversion#Type_promotion) integers
into floats, it doesn't automatically converts `int option` into `int` or _vice
versa_.

```ocaml
# 21 + Some 21;;
Error: This expression has type 'a option
       but an expression was expected of type int
```

In order to combine option values with other values, conversion functions are
needed. Here are the functions provided by the `Option` module to extract the
data contained in an option:
```ocaml
val get : 'a t -> 'a
val value : 'a t -> default:'a -> 'a

> val fold : none:'a -> some:('b -> 'a) -> 'b t -> 'a

Reviewer: I suspect all of these examples are meant for information not an example to run when following this document, and I suspect that will be clear to the end reader. :)

Author: To some readers, it will, but to reduce the entry barrier into the text, we have to change that.

```
`get` returns the content or raises `Invalid_argument` if applied to `None`.
`value` essentially behaves as `get`, except it must be called with a default
value which will be returned of if applied to `None`. `fold` also needs to be
passed a default value that is returned when called on `None`, but it also
expects a function that will be applied to the content of the option, when not
empty.

As a remark, observe that `value` can be implemented using `fold`:
```ocaml
# let value ~default = Option.fold ~none:default ~some:Fun.id;;
val value : default:'a -> 'a option -> 'a = <fun>
# Option.value ~default:() None = value ~default:() None;;
- : bool = true
# Option.value ~default:() (Some ()) = value ~default:() (Some ());;
- : bool = true
```

It is also possible to perform pattern matching on option values:
```ocaml
match opt with
| None -> ...    (* Something *)

> | Some x -> ...  (* Something else *)

Reviewer: Same as the other questions... is this complete or should the reader be able to run it with an output (or combine it with something else that is runable)?

Author: No, that one is not meant to be run at all

```
However, sequencing such expressions leads to deep nesting which is often
considered bad:

> if you need more than 3 levels of indentation, you're screwed anyway, and
> should fix your program.

[Linux Kernel Style
Guide](https://www.kernel.org/doc/Documentation/process/coding-style.rst)

The recomended way to avoid that is to refrain from or delay attempting to
access the content of an option value.

### Using on `Option.map` and `Option.bind`

Let's start with an example. Let's imagine one needs to write a function
returning the [hostname](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Hostname) part of an
email address. For instance, given the email
"gaston.lagaffe@courrier.dupuis.be," it would return "courrier."

Here is a questionable but straightforward implementation using exceptions:
```ocaml
let host email =
  let fqdn_pos = String.index email '@' + 1 in
  let fqdn_len = String.length email - fqdn_pos in
  let fqdn = String.sub email fqdn_pos fqdn_len in
  try
    let host_len = String.index fqdn '.' in
    String.sub fqdn 0 host_len
  with Not_found ->

>     if fqdn <> "" then fqdn else raise Not_found

Reviewer: If I put the `;;` at the end, I get this output: `val host : string -> string = <fun>`

Author: You're right. This one is better with hash, double semicolumn and type.

```
This may fail by raising `Not_found` if the first the call to `String.index`
does, which make sense since if there is no `@` character in the input string,
signifying that it's not an email address. However, if the second call to `String.index` fails,
meaning no dot character was found, we may return the whole fully qualified
domain name (FQDN) as a fallback, but only if it isn't the empty string.

Note that `String.sub` may throw `Invalid_argument`. Fortunately, this can't
happen. In the worst case, the `@` character is the last one, then `fqdn_pos` is
off range by one but `fqdn_len` is null, and that combination of parameters
doesn't count as an invalid substring.

Below is the equivalent function using the same logic, but using `Option` instead of
exceptions:
```ocaml
let host_opt email =
  match String.index_opt email '@' with
  | Some at_pos -> begin
      let fqdn_pos = at_pos + 1 in
      let fqdn_len = String.length email - fqdn_pos in
      let fqdn = String.sub email fqdn_pos fqdn_len in
      match String.index_opt fqdn '.' with
      | Some host_len -> Some (String.sub fqdn 0 host_len)
      | None -> if fqdn <> "" then Some fqdn else None
    end

>   | None -> None

Reviewer: If I put the `;;` at this end of this, I get this output `val host_opt : string -> string option = <fun>`

```

Although it qualifies as safe, its legibility isn't improved. Some may even
claim it is worse.

Before showing how to improve this code, we need to explain how `Option.map` and
`Option.bind` work.
```ocaml
val Option.map : ('a -> 'b) -> 'a option -> 'b option
val Option.bind : 'a option -> ('a -> 'b option) -> 'b option
```

`Option.map` applies a function `f` to an option parameter, if it isn't `None`
```ocaml
let map f = function
| Some x -> Some (f x)

> | None -> None

Reviewer: I'll stop asking the same question to reduce the noise. Once I have clarity around these snippets of code that don't run or have outputs, whether they're not supposed to test it or if it belongs with another part, I'll revisit them. :)

Author: No problem. You pointed a true issue

`@raise`. The `Result` type is intended to fill this gap: manage error in data,
like option values, but also provide information on errors, like exceptions. It
is the topic of the next section.

## `Result` Type

The `Result` module of the standard library defines the following type:

```ocaml
type ('a, 'b) result =
  | Ok of 'a
  | Error of 'b
```

A value `Ok x` means that the computation succeeded and produced `x`, and a
value `Error e` means that it failed and `e` represents whatever error
information has been collected in the process. Pattern matching can be used to
deal with both cases, as with any other sum type. However using `map` and `bind`
can be more convenient, maybe even more as it was with `Option`.

Before taking a look at `Result.map`, let's think about `List.map` and
`Option.map` under a changed perspective. Both functions behave as identity when
applied to `[]` or `None`, respectively. That's the only possibility since those
parameters don't carry any data. Which isn't the case in `Result` with its
`Error` constructor. Nethertheless, `Result.map` is implemented likewise, on
`Error`, it also behaves like identity.
```ocaml
let map f = function
| Ok x -> Ok (f x)

> | Error e -> Error e

Reviewer: If I run the previous 517-520 in conjunction with this 536-539 and add the `;;` at the end, I get: 
``type ('a, 'b) result = Ok of 'a | Error of 'b
val map : ('a -> 'b) -> ('a, 'c) result -> ('b, 'c) result = <fun>``
Should this be a part of this section?

Author: I've included it.

```

The `Result` module has two map functions: the one we've just seen and another
one, with the same logic, applied to `Error`:
```ocaml
let map_error f = function
| Ok x -> Ok x

> | Error e -> f e

Reviewer: If I add the `;;` at the end, I get: 
`val map_error : ('a -> ('b, 'c) result) -> ('b, 'a) result -> ('b, 'c) result =
  <fun>` 
Should this be included?

Author: I've included it too.

  as a fallback

When used to handle errors with catch statements, it requires some time to get
used the latter style. The key idea is avoiding or deferring from directly
looking into option values. Instead, pass them along using _ad-hoc_ pipes (such
as `map` and `bind`). Erik Meijer call that style: “following the happy path”.
Visually, it also resembles the “early return“ pattern often found in C.

One of the limitations of the option type is it doesn't record the reason which
prevented having a return value. `None` is silent, it doesn't say anything about
what went wrong. For this reason, functions returning option values should
document the circumstances under which it may return `None`. Such a
documentation is likely to ressemble to the one required for exceptions using
`@raise`. The `Result` type is intended to fill this gap: manage error in data,
like option values, but also provide information on errors, like exceptions. It
is the topic of the next section.

## Using the `Result` Type for Errors

The `Result` module of the standard library defines the following type:

```ocaml
type ('a, 'b) result =
  | Ok of 'a
  | Error of 'b
```

> A value `Ok x` means that the computation succeeded and produced `x`, and a
> value `Error e` means that it failed and `e` represents whatever error
> information has been collected in the process. Pattern matching can be used to
> deal with both cases, as with any other sum type. However using `map` and `bind`
> can be more convenient, maybe even more as it was with `Option`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
A value `Ok x` means that the computation succeeded and produced `x`, a
value `Error e` means that it failed, and `e` represents whatever error
information has been collected in the process. Pattern matching can be used to
deal with both cases, as with any other sum type. However using `map` and `bind`
can be more convenient, maybe even more as it was with `Option`.
```

```

Although any kind of data can be wrapped as a `result` `Error`, it is
recommended to use that constructor to carry actual errors, for instance:
- `exn`, in which case the result type just makes exceptions explicit
- `string`, where the error case is a message that indicates what failed
- `string Lazy.t`, a more elaborate form of error message that is only evaluated
  if printing is required
- some polymorphic variant, with one case per possible error. This is very
  accurate (each error can be dealt with explicitly and occurs in the type), but
  the use of polymorphic variants sometimes make the code harder to read.

Note that some say the types `result` and `Either.t` are
[ismorphic](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Isomorphism). Concretely, it means
it's always possible to replace one by the other, like in a completely neutral
refactoring. Values of type `result` and `Either.t` can be translated back and
forth, and appling both translations one after the other, in any order, returns
to the starting value. Nevertheless, this doesn't mean `result` should be used
in place of `Either.t`, or vice versa. Naming things matters, as punned by Phil
Karlton's famous quote:

> > There are only two hard things in Computer Science: cache invalidation and
> > naming things.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
> Two confusing things in Computer Science: cache invalidation and
> naming things.
```
Suggestion as I'm sure there are many hard thing in Computer Science or everyone would be a programmer making the big bucks! 😆  ... but don't feel the need to change it if you like it the way it is. I was taught not to put things like "it's so easy" or "this isn't at all difficult," because if it's difficult for the reader, then they might feel stupid and get discouraged.

| _ -> failwith "this system is not supported"
```

> It is right to use `failwith`, using `assert` would be wrong. Here is the dual

Reviewer: ```suggestion
It is right to use `failwith` because using `assert` would be incorrect. Here is the dual
```

example:
```ocaml
function x when true -> () | _ -> assert false
```

> Here, it would be wrong to use `failwith` since it requires the compiler to be
> bugged or the system to be corrupted for second code path to be executed.
> Breakage of the language semantics qualifies as extraordinary circumstances, it
> is catastrophic.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Here, it wouldn't be beneficial to use `failwith` since it requires the compiler to be
bugged or the system to be corrupted for second code path to be executed.
Breakage of the language semantics qualifies as extraordinary circumstances; it
is catastrophic.
```

# Concluding Remarks

Properly handling errors is a complex matter. It is [cross-cutting

> concern](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Cross-cutting_concern), it touches all

Reviewer: ```suggestion
concern](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Cross-cutting_concern); it touches all
```

parts of an application and can't be isolated in dedicated module. In contrast
to several other main stream languages, OCaml provides several mechanisms to
handled exceptional circumstances, all with good runtime performances and code
understandability. Using them properly requires some initial learning and

> partice. Later, it always require some thinking, which is good since proper

Reviewer: ```suggestion
pratice. Later, it always require some thinking, which is good since proper
```

> management of errors shouldn't ever be overlooked. No error handling is better

Reviewer: ```suggestion
error management shouldn't ever be overlooked. No error handling is better
```

> than the others, and is should be matter of adequacy to the context rather some

Reviewer: ```suggestion
than the others, and it should be matter of adequacy to the context rather some
```

| _ -> failwith "this system is not supported"
```

> It is right to use `failwith` because using `assert` would be incorrect. Here is

Reviewer: ```suggestion
It is right to use `failwith`, because using `assert` would be incorrect. Here is
```

the dual example:
```ocaml
function x when true -> () | _ -> assert false
```

> Here, it wouldn't be beneficial to use `failwith` since it requires the compiler
> to be bugged or the system to be corrupted for second code path to be executed.
> Breakage of the language semantics qualifies as extraordinary circumstances; it
> is catastrophic.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Here, it wouldn't be beneficial to use `failwith` because it requires a corrupted system or
for the compiler to be bugged for the second code path to be executed.
Breakage of the language semantics qualifies as extraordinary circumstances. It
is catastrophic!
```
Tried to reduce the repetitive to be... by taking one out. If it doesn't mean the same thing, feel free to reject it, but I'd still change "since" to "because."

# Concluding Remarks

> Properly handling errors is a complex matter. It is [cross-cutting
> concern](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Cross-cutting_concern), touches all parts
> of an application and can't be isolated in a dedicated module. In contrast to
> several other mainstream languages, OCaml provides several mechanisms to handle
> exceptional circumstances, all with good runtime performance and code
> understandability. Using them properly requires some initial learning and
> practice. Later, it always requires some thinking, which is good since proper
> error management shouldn't ever be overlooked. No error handling is better
> than the others, and is should be matter of adequacy to the context rather than
> of taste. But opiniated OCaml code is also fine, so it's a balance.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Properly handling errors is a complex matter. It is [cross-cutting
concern](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Cross-cutting_concern), touches all parts
of an application, and can't be isolated in a dedicated module. In contrast to
several other mainstream languages, OCaml provides several mechanisms to handle
exceptional circumstances, all with good runtime performance and code
understandability. Using them properly requires some initial learning and
practice. Later, it always requires some thinking, which is good since proper
error management shouldn't ever be overlooked. No error handling is better
than the others, and is should be matter of adequacy to the context rather than
of taste. But opinionated OCaml code is also fine, so it's a balance.
```

practice. Later, it always requires some thinking, which is good since proper
error management shouldn't ever be overlooked. No error handling is better
than the others, and is should be matter of adequacy to the context rather than
of taste. But opinionated OCaml code is also fine, so it's a balance.

# External Ressources

- [“Exceptions”](https://v2.ocaml.org/releases/5.0/htmlman/coreexamples.html#s%3Aexceptions) in ”The OCaml Manual, The Core Language”, chapter 1, section 6, December 2022
- [Module **`option`**](https://v2.ocaml.org/releases/5.0/api/Option.html) in OCaml Library
- [Module **`result`**](https://v2.ocaml.org/releases/5.0/api/Result.html) in Ocaml Library
- [“Error Handling”](https://dev.realworldocaml.org/error-handling.html) in “Real World OCaml”, part 7, Yaron Minsky and Anil Madhavapeddy, 2ⁿᵈ edition, Cambridge University Press, October 2022
- “Add "finally" function to Pervasives”, Marcello Seri, GitHub PR, [ocaml/ocaml/pull/1855](https://github.com/ocaml/ocaml/pull/1855)
- “A guide to recover from interrupts”, Guillaume Munch-Maccagnoni, parf the [`memprof-limits`](https://gitlab.com/gadmm/memprof-limits/) documentation

> # Acknowledgements
> 
> - Authors
>   1. Simon Cruanes [@c-cube](https://github.com/c-cubeauthored)
>   2. John Whitington [@johnwhitington](https://github.com/johnwhitington)
>   3. Cuihtlauac Alvarado [@cuihtlauac](https://github.com/cuihtlauac)
> - Contributors
>   * Dan Frumin [@co-dan](https://github.com/co-dan)
>   * Jean-Pierre Rodi
>   * Thibaut Mattio [@tmattio](https://github.com/tmattio)
>   * Jonah Beckford [@jonahbeckford](https://github.com/jonahbeckford)
> - Suggestions and Corrections:
>   * Claude Jager-Rubinson
>   * [@rand00](https://github.com/rand00)
>   * Guillaume Munch-Maccagnoni [@gadmm](https://github.com/gadmm)
>   * Edwin Török [@edwintorok](https://github.com/edwintorok)
>   * Kim Nguyễn [@Tchou](https://github.com/Tchou)
>   * Ashine Foster [@AshineFoster](https://github.com/AshineFoster)
>   * Miod Vallat [@dustanddreams](https://github.com/dustanddreams)
>   * Christine Rose [@christinerose](https://github.com/christinerose)
>   * Riku Silvola [@rikusilvola](https://github.com/rikusilvola)
>   * Guillaume Petiot [@gpetiot](https://github.com/gpetiot)

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
<!--
Acknowledgements

- Authors
  1. Simon Cruanes [@c-cube](https://github.com/c-cubeauthored)
  2. John Whitington [@johnwhitington](https://github.com/johnwhitington)
  3. Cuihtlauac Alvarado [@cuihtlauac](https://github.com/cuihtlauac)
- Contributors
  * Dan Frumin [@co-dan](https://github.com/co-dan)
  * Jean-Pierre Rodi
  * Thibaut Mattio [@tmattio](https://github.com/tmattio)
  * Jonah Beckford [@jonahbeckford](https://github.com/jonahbeckford)
- Suggestions and Corrections:
  * Claude Jager-Rubinson
  * [@rand00](https://github.com/rand00)
  * Guillaume Munch-Maccagnoni [@gadmm](https://github.com/gadmm)
  * Edwin Török [@edwintorok](https://github.com/edwintorok)
  * Kim Nguyễn [@Tchou](https://github.com/Tchou)
  * Ashine Foster [@AshineFoster](https://github.com/AshineFoster)
  * Miod Vallat [@dustanddreams](https://github.com/dustanddreams)
  * Christine Rose [@christinerose](https://github.com/christinerose)
  * Riku Silvola [@rikusilvola](https://github.com/rikusilvola)
  * Guillaume Petiot [@gpetiot](https://github.com/gpetiot)
-->
```

Can we do the acknowledgements in a comment?

It's great to acknowledge people's efforts, but over time this grows very large and distracts from the content itself. In the sequences documentation, the same section is called "Credits". :thinking:
